Programs

B.Tech
The Department runs a four-year B.Tech. program in Electronics Engineering with an intake of 80 every year.

M. Tech
Department offers M.Tech. program under four different specializations viz., Microwave Engineering, Digital Techniques & Instrumentation, Communication System Engineering,. and Microelectronics engineering with a total intake of 47 every year. In addition, few seats are reserved for admission under sponsored and part-time (only for internal staff) categories.

Ph.D.
Department also runs the doctoral program under which about 10-20 research scholars are admitted every year. Opportunity is also available for the Ph.D, registration under sponsored and part-time (only for internal staff) categories. Admission of a few candidate is made through the QIP program for the teachers from AICTE sponsored institutions.

Specialization : Microelectronics Engineering

Microelectronics Engineering: The inception of this specialization was closely associated with the Centre for Research in Microelectronics (CRME) established by the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), Govt. of India in 1983. The main aim of this Centre is to carry out teaching and research in the area of modeling, simulation, design, fabrication and characterization of advanced microelectronic, nanoelectronic and optoelectronic devices and circuits for electronic, gas sensing, bio-sensing, photodetection and solar cell applications. In addition to the regular Ph.D. program under this specialization, the department also offers a separate specialization in the Microelectronics Engineering at M.Tech. level. A number of B.Tech. students also take advanced undergraduate projects on the fabrication and characterization of thick film and thin film devices for various electronic, optoelectronic and sensing applications. .

Sub Areas :

Modeling and TCAD Simulation of Advanced non-classical MOS transistors,
Colloidal Quantum Dots based Spectrum Selective and Self-Powered Photodetectors
Metal-Oxide Thin Film Based Devices for Optoelectronic and Gas Sensing Applications,
Solar Cells,
Nanostructure Electrodes for Bio-Sensing Applications,

Specialization : Microwave Engineering

Microwave Engineering specialization was offered to the UG, PG and Ph.D. students since the year of establishment (1971) of the Department. Due to significant R&D contributions in this area, DST, Govt. of India sanctioned ~ Rs. 1 crore fund in late 1970’s for the project entitled ‘High Power Microwave Tubes’, Which was later converted to Centre of Research in Microwave Tubes (CRMT) in 1980’s funded by UGC. Further, UGC funded Special Assistance Programme (SAP) at the level of Departmental Special Assistance (DSA) began in 1983 in two thrust areas including Microwave Engineering thrust area. The pace of R&D activities in the area accelerated with the approval of DSA programme by UGC in 1983 and continued unabated till date. After successful completion of the DSA programme in 1988, four phases of UGC funded CAS programmes were sanctioned which included Microwave Engineering thrust area. CAS-Phase-IV programme was terminated in 2012 after conversion of our Institute into an IIT. Sponsored research projects in the areas of Microwave and Millimeter Wave Tubes- TWTs, Gyro-TWTs and Gyrotrons , High Power Microwave Devices for Directed Energy weaponry, Type MM cathodes for Microwave Tubes, Broadband Microstrip Antennas, and Dielectric Horn Antennas funded by DST, MHRD, DOE, DRDO and AICTE have been successfully completed by the Microwave Engineering Group. Starting from the year 1998, on the average more than three Ph.Ds. per year have been awarded and over twenty two (22) research papers per year have been published in international journals/national journals/conference proceedings from this specialization. One DSc degree in Electronics Engineering from this specialization was also awarded in 2006.

Sub Areas :

Microwave and Millimeter Wave Tubes
Microwave and Millimeter Wave Antennas
MIC Passive Devices
Dielectric Horn and Dielectric Resonator Antennas
Remote Sensing
Biological Effects and Medical Applications of Microwaves
PBG Structures and Metamaterials

Specialization : Communication Systems

This research group focusses primarily on PHY and MAC layer issues of wireless networks. Current focus of his research group is on Millimeter wave communications for 5G wireless, waveforms for 5G and anti-jamming techniques for LTE-A cellular wireless networks. "Learning for Wireless Networks" is another exciting research topic that the research group started working on in the recent past. Regression and/or classification framework developed in the machine learning community might help designing more efficient wireless receivers. With regard to MAC layer, learning the dynamics of a multi-user network (either through reinforcement learning or supervised learning) can help wireless engineers in achieving optimal radio resource management. Srinivas's research group is highly enthusiastic and aspires to learn the state-of-the-art learning concepts in order to learn how to communicate better.

Sub Areas :

Wireless Communication
Nano-Communication Networks
Optical communication: Non-traditional optical fibers, FBG based optical filters
Microwave Communications

Specialization : Digital Techniques & Instrumentation

Digital Techniques and Instrumentation (DTI) specialization of the Department was started in the academic year 1974 with the aim to train the manpower and conduct the R&D activities in the erstwhile emerging areas of Microprocessors and Microcomputer based Digital System Design, Intelligent Instrumentation, High Speed Computing Circuits and Automated Control Systems. Since its inception this has been a preferred area for PG and PhD students interested in Microprocessor based systems, fault detection and fault tolerant design, virtual and intelligent instrumentation systems and intelligent controllers. Over the past more than four decades of its teaching and research activities DTI specialization has completed large number of sponsored projects funded by Ministry of HRD and AICTE and produced nearly 20 Ph.D. theses. The faculty members of DTI specialization have so far published over 200 research papers in the reputed international/national journals and conferences. Published book entitled ‘Medical Image Marking: Techniques and Applications,’ Springer 2017.

Sub Areas :

Digital waveform synthesis
High speed digital design
Microprocessor and microcontroller based systems
Fault detection and tolerant systems design
Intelligent instrumentation
Wireless sensor networks
Big data analytics
Image Processing, Watermarking, Steganography

Historical Background

The Department of Electronics Engineering came into existence as an offshoot of Electrical Engineering Department in the year 1971 with a great effort from Prof. S.S. Banerjee. In the same year the erstwhile Banaras Engineering College (BENCO), College of Mining and Metallurgy and College of Technology were amalgamated to form the Institute of Technology-Banaras Hindu University (IT-BHU). The Department offers Bachelor, Master and Doctoral programs in Electronics Engineering with the major thrust areas of Microelectronics, Microwave Engineering, Digital Techniques & Instrumentations and Communication Systems. The Department has been actively engaged in research since its inception as evidenced by the research publications. The first major financial support from the Department of Electronics (DoE), Govt. of India in the tune of Rs.1.0 Crore was received by the Department in 1980 to carry out research for development of High Power Microwave Tubes. Subsequently, in recognition of excellent research contribution, the University Grants Commission (UGC) identified the Department to provide financial support under Special Assistance Program (SAP) in 1983 for five years. During this period, the department established three independent research centers e.g., Centre of Research in Microwave Tubes (CRMT), Centre for Research in Microelectronics (CRME) and Centre for Research in Microprocessor Applications (CRMA) supported by UGC/MHRD. The Department was further recognized as a Centre of Advanced Studies (CAS) by the UGC in 1989. The Department successfully completed three phases of CAS in the year 2009. The Department is also one of the DRDO centers for M.Tech. in Electronics Engineering. In addition to this, the Department has been actively pursuing manpower training and collaborative research programs in specialized areas to meet the national manpower requirement in R&D laboratories, academic institutions and industries. The Department has a close interaction with many reputed national R&D laboratories such as DRDO, CSIR, Bharat Electronics Ltd. and leading software companies as well as foreign Universities.
B.Tech
Department of Mechanical engineering offers 4-year bachelor of technology program to the students admitted through JEE (Advanced) with a total intake of 120 students every year. The department offers wide range of optional courses to the students to pursue their interest. The curriculum is periodically updated to meet the changing needs of industry. Curriculum is designed in such a way that technical know-how is imparted in a scientific manner that promotes students problem solving skills and innovation of new technologies. Students are encouraged to take up design and innovation projects that addresses society problems.

Dual Degree (IDD)
Department has strong undergraduate program in mechanical engineering offering B.Tech. and M. Tech dual degree 5-year program called Integrated Dual Degree (IDD). Students take up a major research project for 1 year after completing their 4 years of BTech programme. Both BTech and MTech degree is awarded. IID students are offered monthly scholarships during their final year of degree programme, however, they need to either qualify GATE or secure minimum of 8.0 CGPA.

M.Tech
Mechanical engineering department offers 2 years full time postgraduate (Master in Technology) programs in following 4 areas. M.Tech programme comprises of core courses, specialization related electives, institute electives and supervised research exposition. M.Tech thesis enables graduate students to display their skills in performing independent research in both fundamental and applied problems of mechanical engineering. High standard is expected from the M. Tech thesis resulting in quality research publications or technology development in terms patents or prototype development.

Ph.D.
Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D) program is a department’s flagship program that attracts motivated students from different parts of the country. Interested students can choose their research areas from broad discipline of machine design, thermal and fluid engineering, production engineering an industrial engineering. PhD program comprises of course work for prescribed credits with a minimum prescribed performance and a research dissertation reflecting original and independently performed research contributions in the respective area. To get admission into the Ph.D program, students need to qualify both written exam and interview Call for admission is announced twice in a year. All admitted students are required to successfully complete PhD comprehensive examination after completing the prescribed course work. PhD candidacy is confirmed only after the student has been declared successful in qualifier/comprehensive examination. PhD thesis is expected to result in high quality publications in peer reviewed international journals and conferences or patents.

Specializations:
Machine Design There are many groups in the department working on problems ranging from bio-tribology, finite element method, optimization, vibrations to composite materials, structural health monitoring etc.

Thermal & Fluid Engg Thermal group of the department is actively involved in research and development of technology in variety of problems. Research problems on nanofluids, altenate fuels, renewable energy, refrigeration, CFD, Cryotherapy, IC engine etc. are being carried out by the various faculty and research students of the department.

Production Engg Production Engineering also called as Manufacturing Engineering is a Research based discipline having combination of manufacturing technology, Design engineering sciences & production management sciences. The group woks on the problems of the Manufacturing, Design & management challenges related to Manufacturing such as: Additive manufacturing, Unconventional manufacturing, Metal forming, Material characterizations, Welding Technology, Robotics, Computer Aided Manufacturing, Computer Integrated manufacturing, Machine tools & Machining sciences, product design & development etc. The group is engaged in Teaching, Research & Consultancy & Ind. Training work.

Industrial Management Industrial management group works on the problems, which deals with business administration that are necessary for the success of companies within the manufacturing sector and the encompassing services (operations management, marketing, and financial management).

Historical Background

The Department of Mechanical Engineering came into existence in 1919 under the leadership of Professor Charles A. King, the first Head of the Department and Principal of the erstwhile Banaras Engineering College. Over the last ninety nine years, the department has grown four folds to become the largest department in IIT (BHU),. Varanasi. The post-graduate and doctoral program in the department is well-established and infrastructural facilities exist for studies and research for a range of specialisations such as Machine Design, Thermal and Fluid Engineering, Production Engineering and Industrial Management.
